================================
 Introductory Jupyter notebooks
================================

These notebooks provide an introduction to usage of Firedrake, and are
designed to familiarise you with manipulating Firedrake objects to
solve finite element problems.

To run the notebooks, you will need to `install jupyter
<https://jupyter.org/install.html>`__ *inside* your activated
Firedrake virtualenv.

These notebooks are maintained in the Firedrake repository, so all the
material is available in your Firedrake installation source
directory.  If you installed in ``Documents/firedrake``, then the
notebooks are in the directory
``Documents/firedrake/src/firedrake/docs/notebooks``.  The links to
the notebooks below are non-interactive renderings using `Jupyter
nbviewer <https://nbviewer.jupyter.org>`__.


A first example
===============
In this notebook, we solve the symmetric positive definite "Helmholtz"
equation, and learn about meshes and function spaces.  A rendered
version of this notebook is available `here
<https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/firedrakeproject/firedrake/blob/master/docs/notebooks/01-spd-helmholtz.ipynb>`__.

Incorporating strong boundary conditions
========================================

Next, we modify the problem slightly and solve the Poisson equation.
We introduce strong (Dirichlet) boundary conditions and `how to use
them
<https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/firedrakeproject/firedrake/blob/master/docs/notebooks/02-poisson.ipynb>`__.

A vector-valued problem
=======================

Moving on from scalar problems, we look at our first vector-valued
problem, namely the equations of linear elasticity.  In this notebook,
we learn about some of UFL's support for tensor algebra, and start
looking at `configuring linear solvers
<https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/firedrakeproject/firedrake/blob/master/docs/notebooks/03-elasticity.ipynb>`__.

A time-dependent, nonlinear, problem
====================================

This notebook looks at a simple nonlinear problem, the viscous
Burgers' equation, and also treats simple timestepping schemes.  We
learn about formulating nonlinear, as opposed to linear problems, and
also a little bit about how to write `efficient Firedrake code
<https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/firedrakeproject/firedrake/blob/master/docs/notebooks/04-burgers.ipynb>`__.

A mixed formulation of the Poisson equation
===========================================

`In this notebook
<https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/firedrakeproject/firedrake/blob/master/docs/notebooks/05-mixed-poisson.ipynb>`__.,
we look at our first mixed finite element problem.  A dual formulation
of the Poisson equation.  This equation also appears in the context of
flow in porous media, as Darcy flow.  We introduce mixed function
spaces and how to work with them.  Equations with multiple variables
are typically more challenging to precondition, and so we discuss some
of the preconditioning strategies for such block systems, and how to
control them using PETSc solver options.

PDE-constrained optimisation with `dolfin-adjoint <http://www.dolfin-adjoint.org/>`__
=====================================================================================

Now that we've learnt how to solve some PDEs, we might want to
consider optimisation subject to PDE constraints.  `This notebook
<https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/firedrakeproject/firedrake/blob/master/docs/notebooks/06-pde-constrained-optimisation.ipynb>`__
introduces the use of `dolfin-adjoint
<http://www.dolfin-adjoint.org/>`__ to solve PDE constrained
optimisation problems.  We solve the Stokes equations and minimise
energy loss due to heat, controlling inflow/outflow in a pipe.

Geometric multigrid
===================

The next notebook looks a little bit at the support Firedrake has for
geometric multigrid, and how you can configure complex multilevel
solvers purely using `PETSc options
<https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/firedrakeproject/firedrake/blob/master/docs/notebooks/07-geometric-multigrid.ipynb>`__.

Solver Composition
==================

We next dive a little deeper into the advanced ways in which Firedrake
and PETSc enable solvers and preconditioners to be composed in
arbitrarily complex ways to `create an optimal solution strategy for a
particular problem <https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/firedrakeproject/firedrake/blob/master/docs/notebooks/08-composable-solvers.ipynb>`__.

Hybridisation
=============

Building on the theme of composable solvers, we now explore
`Firedrake's capabilities in the area of static condensation and
hybridisation
<https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/firedrakeproject/firedrake/blob/master/docs/notebooks/09-hybridisation.ipynb>`__.

Sum Factorisation
=================

Our final notebook takes a look under the hood at the sorts of
performance optimisation that Firedrake's compilers can generate. In
this case, we focus on `sum factorisation for tensor product elements <https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/firedrakeproject/firedrake/blob/master/docs/notebooks/10-sum-factorisation.ipynb>`__.
